okay in the previous segment we looked
at discourse analysis from the point of
view of resolving anaphoric expressions
now
other properties of discourse
specifically the concept of coherence so
coherence is an important property of
discourse and let me show you some
examples that make it obvious the first
example is I saw Mary in the street
period she was looking for bookstore it
should be pretty obvious that those two
sentences fit well together the second
sentence explains a little bit about
Mary and explains why I mentioned that I
saw her in the street so there's no
problem here
the second example becomes a little bit
problematic I saw Mary in the street she
has a cat well Wow
both of those services are perhaps true
it is a little awkward to use them in
the same paragraph because there's
really no logical connection between the
two unless perhaps there's more in the
discourse that says she has a cat and
then the cat likes to go outside and
therefore may took the cat outside and
that's why I saw her in the street but
overall this looks a little awkward what
about the next example I saw Mary in the
street
period the pistils one well now this is
really a bad example of coherent
discourse there's really no connection
between those two sentences it's very
hard to imagine a situation in which
those two would make sense together as
you can see we can have a variable
degree of coherence in discourse and
better text better written text is more
coherent so one of the theories that is
used in computational linguistics to
understand how coherence works was
introduced by a man in Thompson in the
80s and that theory is called RSD or
rhetorical structure theory it is used
to determine the structure of discourse
and identify some relations that hold
between sentences and fractions of
sentences so dynasty relations are
determined by two or items one is called
the nucleus of the relation and one is
called the satellite let me give you
examples of both of those suppose that
we have the two sentences the carpenter
was tired period he had been working all
day as you can see the second sentence
elaborates on the first one it gives us
an explanation why the carpenter was
tired one other thing that is important
here is that it starts with the pronoun
so clearly that sentence
the second sentence is less important
than the first time because it depends
on the first one for its existence you
cannot start with he so in rst the
relation between those two sentences is
determined as follows we have a link
between the two that says that he had
been working all day is a satellite in
the relation to the nucleus or the
carpenter was tired and as the names are
probably are clearly indicating nucleus
the nucleus is more important than the
satellite so if we wanted to summarize
this paragraph we would probably want to
pick the nucleus before we pick the
satellite so one of the definitions in
rst is that the satellite increases the
belief in the relation described in the
nucleus so some relations have only one
nucleus others have more than one and
others have one nucleus and one
satellite so some of the examples of rst
relations that I want to show you today
are listed here the first one is a
result so for example the carpenter
worked all day period the new cabinet
was ready in the evening so as you can
see in this example the second sentence
showed the result of the action in the
first sentence explanation the carpenter
was tired period he had spent the entire
day building a new cabinet so in this
example the second sentence explains why
the fact in the first sentence is true
third example parallel the carpenter
worked all day period the upholster took
the day off so we have two sentences
that have parallel structure and the
second one is in parallel with the first
one elaboration the carpenter built the
cabinet period the cabinet had four
doors and an oversized rear panel so the
second sentence is pretty obvious here
gives additional information that
explains in more detail elaborates on
the information in the first sentence
and there are other relations in rst I'm
going to show you a list of them
separately so some of them have a
nucleus in a satellite those include a
circumstance volitional clause purpose
interpretation any statement in some way
and others are multinuclear or in other
words have more than one nucleus those
are sequence contrast and joint so
here's a larger table with examples I'm
just going to mention a few of them in
more detail so let's start with the
first one antithesis the nucleus of an
ethicist this relation is the ideas
favored by the author and the satellite
is the idea is disfavored by the author
so for example the author may say I like
dogs period but I hate chihuahuas
so in the second example we have the
satellite something that is disfavored
and the first example is the nucleus is
the ideas favored by the author let's
now look at an example with this course
that has been analyzed using the taco
structure theory so the document comes
from the Christian Science Monitor it
has a few sentences
the title is bouquets in a basket with
living flowers and then it goes on like
this there is a gardening revolution
going on people are planting flower
baskets with living plants mixing many
types in one container for a full summer
flora beauty to create your own
Victorian do care flowers choose varying
shapes sizes and forms besides a variety
of complementary colors and then new
sentence plants that grow tall should be
surrounded by smaller ones and filled
with others that tumble over the side of
a hanging basket period leaf textures
and colors will also be important and
then finally there is the silver white
foliage of dusty miller the feathery
threads of lotus vine floating down from
above the deep greens or chartreuse even
the widely varied foliage colors of the
coleus so this doctrine was analyzed by
man matheson and thompson in 1983 using
rst and this is the representation that
they came up with so we have a total of
nine what they cut enhances so
utterances are portions of sentences
that have some separate semantics not
all of them correspond directly to
sentences however a sentence can be
split into multiple appearances so we
have the at the lowest level 8 and 9 at
10 verses 8 & 9 are connected with each
other using an elaboration RS
stimulation and if you remember from a
few slides ago the arrow points from the
satellite to the nucleus okay so once
those two utterances 8 & 9 are combined
together the next thing that we can do
is to merge 6 & 7 and also 6 with 8 & 9
both 7 and the group 8 9 are satellites
for the nucleus that appears in 6 and
the relation here is elaboration now we
have a chunk between 6 & 9 that can be
connected with 5 using the purpose
relationship but in this case the
satellite is on the left to create your
own Victorian quote-unquote bouquet of
flowers and the nucleus is 6 to 9 then
on the left-hand side of the diagram we
have a little aberration relation
between appearances 3 & 4 wherefore is
the satellite
once we combine 3 & 4 together they
together as a group form the satellite
of another elaboration relation with
nucleus 2 and then we can combine the
group 2 4 with the group 2 line using
background with 2 for being the
satellite and then finally we can have
another relation at the top called
preparation which links the satellite
Upton's number 1 with the nucleus which
consists of everything else in the
sentence so this is an example of how or
we can annotate texts for rhetorical
structure relations and I want to tell
you right now that there exists
automatic parsers that take narrative
text of this nature and automatically
label with with RSD relationships in a
hierarchical way so one nice resource is
at Simon Fraser University in Canada
that website has the largest repository
of texts annotated for our stimulations
that can be used for training and also
includes a lot of examples and papers on
this topic so the process of identifying
the discourse structure is called
discourse parsing I'm going to just give
you one example of this there has been a
lot more work and that you can find on
the ACL anthology website
so the paper that I want to discuss very
briefly here is by Marco and she hobby
from 2002 in that example they looked at
for RS stimulations contrast codes
explanation evidence as a sequence
condition and elaboration and they also
had a null category that corresponds to
more relation so they used up to 4
million automatically labeled examples
population and use the very simple
classifier based on native base and they
used as features word Corcoran's
features to build their discourse trees
so more details about this work can be
found in the paper on the ACO ontology
website so very briefly I'm going to
discuss one other influential paper in
the history of discourse analysis this
is work by grosse signer and other
people on centering so centering is the
theory that tells you out of all the
possible candidates for an offer a
resolution which one is the so called
Center or the most important concept the
most salient concept that is likely to
be used in enough work expressions in
future sentences so the Gulf same thing
is to understand the local coherence of
discourse and to understand why some
texts are considered more coherent than
others so one of the ideas is centering
is that there will be more influence
load as in cognitive load over the
person are reading the text that would
be associated if the referring
expressions were chosen badly so for
example and for now that refers to a
word several sentences back also too
much focus shift makes the text hard to
understand so the idea of centering is
that we're going to keep the source or
some sort of theme of the document as we
go along through the sentences and this
steam is going to change relatively
rarely so the same thing example that
I'm going to give you is based on the
idea of backwards looking centers and
forward looking centers every utterance
you sub n is known to have so-called
backwards looking Center CB which
connects the current utterance with the
previous utterance u n minus one
also every utterance has a partially
ordered set of forward-looking centers
sub F that are related to the next
utterance and their order depends on
syntax so for example the subject
salience is of a candidate is higher
than the one for the object and finally
we're going to pick the preferred center
among all the forward-looking centers
based on its highest salient score so
for more details on this work you can
read the original papers by gross and
signer and they quickly I'm going to
mention some additional work on cause
document structure so this is discourse
analysis across multiple related
documents so CST is based on relations
similar to rst to some extent but which
apply across multiple sentences multiple
documents and so on so the examples I
things like identity that's when the
same text appears in more than one
document so s/he refers to sentence P
refers to paragraph and D refers to
document some of the other CST
relationships include subsumption so for
example one of the sentences may include
facts a and B and the next sentence may
include facts a B and C so we say that
the first sentence of those subsumes the
second one and so on so there's two
pages of relations that appear in CS d
and there has been work on automatically
identifying Siesta structure in document
sets that contain related documents so
one thing that makes CSD very different
from rst however is that rst is a
deliberate relation whereas est is
typically not deliberate because the
documents may be from different sources
and written by different people so CST
is more of a surface structure relation
whereas is T is a measure of the
deliberate coherence of the discourse as
written by the humans so one more
example discourse analysis is something
that was introduced by Simona Troy and
Marc moons in the early 2000s that is
known as argumentative zoning it is a
discourse model for analyzing scientific
papers and in their work which spans
several years they have looked at the
following labels for different zones of
scientific
aim is one of them so for example the
aim can be the research bore of the
paper textual is the statements about
sentence structure for example in the
next section we're going to talk about X
and we're going to conclude in section 7
own is description of the author's own
work for example methodology results and
discussion background is generally
accepted scientific background for
example the moon rotates around the
earth
contrast is comparison with other work
basis is statements of agreement without
a work and then the final categories
other everything else so for example the
description of other researchers work
and so on
so one other thing that I want to
mention about discourse analysis is the
idea of local entity coherence so this
is work that was done more recently by
Adina Barzillai and Mira la pata so the
idea here was to look at the way that
entities are introduced in documents and
how they are referred to later on in
that document so let's look at an
example from that paper the first
sentence says that the Justice
Department which is the subject of the
sentence is conducting an antitrust
trial as the object against Microsoft
Corporation so Microsoft Corporation is
neither the subject or the object of the
sentence with evidence again X means
that it's not the subject or the object
that the company so the company here's
another subject is increasingly
attempting to crash competitors and
competitors as an object so the idea is
that we want to group together
expressions that refer to the same
entity for example Microsoft Corporation
Microsoft and the company would form one
cluster Netscape would form another
cluster the Justice Department would
form a third cluster and so on and then
within each of those clusters we want to
see whether the first time that an
entity is mentioned it is described as
the subject and maybe perhaps later to
describe as an object and finally it is
mostly described as something else in X
so in the people by Barzillai and lopata
they came up with this kind of entity
grid which shows you the number of
sentences in the document in this case 6
and then in each of those sentences
which of the entities is mentioned and
whether it is the subject and object or
something else and then they come up
with the model that is similar to hmm
that tells you what's the probability
that the some entity that will be
referred to first as a subject then
again as a subject or first as a subject
that is an object and so on and you can
see all the combinations of s/o accent
and nothing so this is one more example
from the Barzilai lopata paper and I
want to tell you that they're active
there's a lot of active research and
discourse analysis in Asia that has been
built on top of this previous work so
this concludes the section on discourse
analysis we're going to switch next to
dialogue systems